How does instructor interaction in discussion forums affect student outcomes in fully online courses?

1. Introduction:

1a. Instructor presence

It is well documented that instructor presence is critical for 
positive student outcomes. Proper facilitation can 
affect the quality and frequency of vital interactions students
have amongst themselves, with content, and with instructors [citation needed]. The 
Community of Inquiry (CoI) model frames this idea in a larger context,
specifying that instructor/teaching presence is part of a more general
conceptualization of the educational experience [Garrison, Anderson, Archer 2000]. In the 
CoI framework, teaching presence is one of three essential components to 
a student's education and is defined as, "the design, facilitation, and direction of cognitive and social
processes for the purpose of realizing personally meaningful and educationally worthwhile
learning outcomes" [Anderson, Rourke, Garrison, Archer 2001]. In other words, 
teaching presence is a supportive role meant for curating and disseminating content,
assessing student understanding, and providing constructive feedback. 
Teaching presence in this regard directly contribute to students' perceptions
of support, perceptions of learning, and their final grades [Arbaugh 2014]. In fact,
instructor activity may account for the most significant impact on students' 
academic outcomes [Rockinson-Szapiw et. al, 2016]. Marks, Sibley, and Arbaugh
found that instructor-student interaction in online courses is more important than
student-student or student-content interaction [Marks, Sibley, Arbaugh 2005]. In
any case, direct instructor facilitation is a necessity for deep and meaningful learning [Garrison, Cleveland-Innes 2005].


1b. Role of online discussions

In an online environment with high transactional distance between students and
faculty, the discussion forum has an important role in fostering interpersonal
interaction. The asynchronous learning platform inherently limits this kind of 
interaction and thus special care must be taken to sustain cognitive and social
presence in the course. In particular, instructors must be able to facilitate
student-driven learning:

	"Facilitation is the facet of teaching presence that ensures
	that social presence is established among community members and, in turn, that
	cognitive processes are directed to personally meaningful and educationally 
	worthwhile outcomes" [Vaughan, Cleveland-Innes, Garrison 2013].

Interpersonal interaction, though well-intended, may not always create
downstream positive effects on creating (sustaining?) an effective CoI. 
The literature has recently focused more intently on evaluating the quality
of such interaction, presuming that the mere existence of student-student and
student-instructor communcation is not sufficient for impacting student learning [Jaggars, Xu 2016].
This echoes thoughts expressed in [Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, 2005]:

	"...interaction is not a guarantee that
	students are cognitively engaged in an educationally meaningful manner.
	High levels of interaction may be reflective of group cohesion, but it does
	not directly create cognitive development or facilitate meaningful learning
	and understanding. Interaction directed to cognitive outcomes is characterized
	more by the qualitative nature of the interaction and less by quantitative
	measures."

Instead, effective interaction must have a clear purpose and facilitate content delivery [Naidu 2013].
In the context of forums, instructors must be well-informed about the nature of the 
course and circumstances of their students in order to design an environment that
fosters meaningful discussion. By designing discussion activities that account
for differences in student needs, expectations, and concerns, forums can overcome
hurdles that may hinder student and instructor participation [Barran, Correia 2009].
Results from one qualitative study of online conversations suggest that the quality
(defined as being reflective of the student's belief and supported by sufficient evidence)
of a post is the most important criterion for predicting direct responses [Ho, Swan 2007].
Similarly, [Balaji, Chakrabarti 2010] found that the perceived richness of online discussion
forums had significant positive effects on student participation, interaction, and learning.

Although it is clear that effective forums require significant design considerations,
the proper frequency, quality, and type of instructor intervention in this context is less 
apparent. Tomkin and Charlevoix (2014) investigated in a randomly assigned A/B test the effect
of instructor involvement in MOOC discussions on student outcomes and found that the
instructor intervention had no statistically significant impact on completion rates,
participation rates, or satisfaction with the course. The authors concluded that one
explanation for this null result was that the course was highly structured and thus
did not necessarily require high levels of student-instructor interaction. Yet, this
phenomenon persists in other contexts as well. A separate study exploring the effects of
online discussion in a sophomore-level university course found that interaction through
discussion did not contribute significantly to students' perceptions of teaching
and cognitive presence [Cho, Tobias, 2016]. Other research has even found a negative
relationship between the number of student posts and the number of faculty posts [Mazzolini, Maddison 2007]. 
Specifically, [Mazzolini and Maddison 2007] discovered that forums with a higher 
number of faculty posts exhibited less student postings as well as shorter threads overall.
A qualitative survey following their analysis revealed that the majority of instructors perceived frequent instructor intervention as a means to increase the volume of student posts, contradicting 
the quantitative outcomes the researchers previously found. Despite this, students
did report in surveys an appreciation for initial and follow-up questions to discussion
threads [M & M, 2007]. 

In a similar vein, [Hosler, Arend 2012] found that students wanted instructor
participation in discussions - they felt that this interaction encouraged critical
thinking among the group. Students also valued instructors' attempts to invite participation
from all students. [Cranney, Wallace, Alexander, Alfano 2011] revealed a positive correlation
between student discussion grades and instructor time spent in an online course, suggesting
that at the very least there is some relationship between the two. However, they did not find
a relationship between student discussion grades and the number of instructor posts. [Ertmer, Koehler 2015]
were unable to find a direct relationship between facilitation and the quantity of student posts,
but did note that greater instructor involvement seemed to lead to equal or greater engagement
of the participants in the form of higher quality posts.

The ambiguity of the current literature does not provide enough insight on the 
most effective methods of instructor involvement in online discussion forums. Therefore,
the purpose of this study was to quantitatively specify the effect of instructor
engagement in online forums on various student outcomes. In particular, this research
focused on the relationship between instructor activity and student perception's of faculty
engagement, student grade outcomes, and student activity in discussion forums.



2. Data Sources

The dataset was assembled by first extracting post metadata from the Blackboard Learning
Management System (LMS) and then aggregating post characteristics into a thread-level dataset.
That is, each row in the this dataset represented an individual thread within a forum and contained
features describing the student and instructor activity occurring in the thread. Often instructors
use multiple forums in a single course to partition discussions by its expected content. For instance,
one forum's purpose might be to simulate "hallway conversations", where students and instructors discuss
general course policies and guidelines. Conversely, other forums might be directed at a particular chapter
or subtopic within a course's curriculum. In a single course we would then expect to observe high
variation in the type of thread activity between forums. Furthermore, in order to investigate
the actual discussions that participants were having it was necessary to keep the data at the
thread-level, allowing us to make sense of the frequency, type, and quality of interactions. 
Aggregating further to the forum-level may have washed out any potential interaction effects we sought to observe,
which is why we chose to maintain this granularity.

The dataset represents _______ forum threads from _____ fully online undergraduate course-shells spanning
the spring semester of 2016 through the summer semester of 2018. Course-shells are unique Blackboard instances for a course-section 
or a group of course-sections taught by the same instructor in the same term. In the case that
a shell contains multiple sections, instructors may create duplicate forums to keep students in
different sections partitioned. Similarly, instructors teaching high-enrollment courses 
may elect to group their students so that they can only participate within their group's forums.
In both scenarios, there are no differences in the forums across student groupings - they 
are simply duplicated in order to decrease the number of participants in each forum. The observations in this
dataset are limited to exclude any irregular course types (non-standard grading schemes, shortened course-length, internships, etc.),
threads without a designated parent post, and overly long posts. We chose to eliminate the irregular course types
because of the high likelihood of nonstandard forum use and the "orphan" posts
were likely a result of invalid data collection, although we were unable to verify this claim. There were very few
posts with outlying length so we were able to confirm their validity by navigating to the actual forum. 
In most cases, these posts were made by instructors and used to disseminate huge amounts of course information at once - 
as if the syllabus had simply been pasted in. We determined that these posts were not of interest to this study as they
did not represent an actual instance of discussion.









